Introduction to Artificial Intelligence         Final Thesis of 2022 Autumn Semester        Intelligent archaeological overview project
1Abstract
With the continuous development of AI technology, 
more and more industries are interlinked with AI, resulting 
in many fantastic reactions and bringing about huge 
industry changes. In archaeological technology, the use of 
convolutional neural network (CNN) algorithms for 
archaeological classification and analysis is necessary due 
to the gradual lack of talent and the high level of 
knowledge required. There are currently some attempts in 
different archaeological fields. Most of the attempts are 
relatively simple attempts at classification. In the case of 
ceramic structure classification, CNN is a highly accurate 
accessible and effective method of classifying ceramic 
structures that can be applied at a larger scale due to its 
high degree of texturization.
1. Introduction
In archaeological activities, the sorting and 
reorganization  of large quantities of ceramic sherds, or the 
extraction of features or the analysis of their composition, 
requires a great deal of time and qualified expertise, which 
inevitably leads to errors in the sorting process due to 
various subjective factors. The introduction of 
convolutional neural networks as a tool for classifying 
ceramic structures is therefore necessary, not to abandon 
manual classification, but to combine the various expertise 
of different experts to achieve more objective and efficient 
classification tasks and more accurate results. As CNNs 
continue to evolve, more and more learning sets are being 
developed, but they have yet to be exploited in depth in the 
field of archaeology. Convolutional neural networks, with 
their highly discriminative nature for texture, are uniquely 
suited to classifying the composition of rock flakes.
In recent years CNN has been applied experimentally 
in various fields in the direction of archaeology, but all 
changes are the same, in a nutshell, surface features are 
extracted by scanning and then the extracted features are 
refined by machine learning methods for classification. The structural iterative specificity of different network 
models has different adaptations for processing 
archaeological data of smaller orders of magnitude.
2.1. An analysis of the context of ancient ceramic 
research in archaeology
The classification of ancient ceramics or ceramic 
sherds is of great importance in archaeology. Firstly, the 
carved or patterned surface features allow the local cultural 
characteristics of the ceramic's origin to be identified, 
which is of great importance for the study of cultural 
diffusion. Furthermore, the analysis of the composition of 
ancient ceramics, combined with the distribution of 
minerals in their place of origin, allows for an analysis of 
the geological composition of the period, which can also 
shed light on plate movements. In addition, the study of the 
classification of ceramics from different regions is also 
important for the study of the spread and distribution of 
ancient trade routes. Because the huge amount of 
classification work and the need for high accuracy make 
this a very time-consuming and labor-intensive task. CNNs 
are a very efficient and promising solution to this problem, 
which can be solved with the help of other autonomous 
analysis techniques.
2.2. The main methods of classifying ceramic 
structure
There are two main methods of classifying ceramics, 
one of which is to classify the macroscopic features on the 
surface of the ceramic, such as carved patterns, texts and 
the content of paintings. This approach requires ceramics 
and ceramic sherds to be complete, reflecting essentially 
the full range of features, and in the case of sherds a further 
layer of classification criteria is required to integrate sherds 
containing similar features. This is the most intuitive way 
of classifying ceramics and is less prone to error by chance, 
but for a time when painted ceramics or carving techniques 
were not widespread, this intuitive way of classification is 
not so easy, and it is difficult to analyse the colour of the 
fragments of clay alone to arrive at an efficient form of Application of CNN in classifying the structure of ancient ceramics
Pan Lei Chen ZhaoRui
12010919 12010906
MAE CSIntroduction to Artificial Intelligence         Final Thesis of 2022 Autumn Semester        Intelligent archaeological overview project
2classification.
Another type of classification that is now more 
commonly used is the analysis of micro-composition 
components. This takes the form of thin slicing of 
ceramics, cutting them off and using a microscope and 
superimposing different polarised light to obtain a two-
dimensional image, a three-colour map or a greyscale map, 
which allows a good analysis of the composition, with 
three main components: inclusions, clay matrix and gas 
interstices, in another way, the analysis of the glass phase, 
the mineral crystalline phase and the gas phase. This is 
essentially the same criterion as for the archaeological 
classification of rocks, for the reason that ceramics are also 
a man-made rock. Once the sections have been obtained, 
there are two types of experiments: direct textural and 
modal analyses, and indirect chemical analyses using 
different chemical properties. This classification method 
has the advantage of sufficient quantitative data and a high 
degree of objectivity, but is not very efficient, with a large 
number of slices and statistics. It also requires the 
extraction of ceramic structures, which can cause a certain 
amount of per se damage, especially when the data set is 
not quite sufficient with a small sample size. Rather, this 
classification, which is more dependent on the size of the 
dataset and has more objective and clear conditions for 
analysis, is more suitable for CNN use than the other 
convenience of 3D modelling that can be scanned for 
analysis.
3. Introduction to Convolutional Neural Network 
Models
3.1 Basic Concepts of Convolutional Neural 
Networks 
3.1.1 Basic concepts
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are a class of 
feedforward neural networks that include convolutional 
computation and have a deep structure, and are one of the 
representative algorithms of deep learning. Compared to 
other deep learning structures, CNN can give better results 
in image and speech recognition. This model can also be 
trained using back propagation algorithms. Compared to 
other deep, feed-forward neural networks, CNN require 
fewer parameters to be considered, making them an 
attractive deep learning structure.
CNN consist of these main types of layers: an input 
layer, a convolutional layer, a pooling layer, a fully 
connected layer and an output layer. The input layer is 
capable of processing multidimensional data and 
normalising the input data. The convolutional layer 
consists of three parts: the convolutional kernel, the 
convolutional layer parameters and the activation function, which works by regularly sweeping through the input 
features, multiplying them by matrix elements and 
superimposing deviations within the perceptual field. The 
convolutional layer parameters include the convolutional 
kernel size, step size and padding, which together 
determine the size of the convolutional layer's output 
feature map and are the hyperparameters of the 
convolutional neural network. The convolutional layer also 
contains an excitation function to assist in the 
representation of complex features. After feature extraction 
in the convolutional layer, the output feature map is passed 
to the pooling layer for feature selection and information 
filtering. The pooling layer contains a pre-defined pooling 
function that replaces the results of a single point in the 
feature map with the feature map statistics of its 
neighbouring regions. The pooling layer selects the pooled 
regions in the same way as the convolutional kernel scans 
the feature map, controlled by pooling size, step size and 
padding. The fully connected layer in a convolutional 
neural network is equivalent to the implicit layer in a 
traditional feedforward neural network. The fully-
connected layer is located at the end of the implicit layer of 
the CNN and only passes signals to the other fully-
connected layers. The feature map loses its spatial topology 
in the fully connected layer and is expanded into a vector 
and passed through the excitation function.
3.1.2 The history of CNNs
CNNs can be traced back to Hubel and Wiesel's 1968 paper 
on how the visual cortex of cats and monkeys contains 
neurons that respond individually to small areas of the 
visual field, and that if the eye does not move, the area of 
visual space where a visual stimulus affects a single neuron 
is called its Receptive Field. Neighbouring cells have 
similar and overlapping receptive fields. The size and 
location of the receptive fields vary systematically between 
cortices, forming a complete visuospatial map. This 
research laid the foundation for local perception in CNNs.
In 1980, the neocognitron was proposed, marking the 
first initial CNN and the first application of the receptive 
field concept in the field of artificial neural networks. The 
neocognitron decomposes a visual pattern into many sub-
patterns (features), which then enter a hierarchically 
progressively connected feature plane for processing.
  In 1988, the Shift-invariant neural network (SNN) 
was proposed, taking the CNN's capabilities one step 
further, enabling it to accomplish recognition even when 
objects are displaced or slightly deformed.
The feed-forward architecture of the CNN is extended 
by lateral and feedback connections in the Neural 
abstraction pyramid. The resulting recurrent convolutional 
network allows flexible incorporation of situational 
information to iteratively resolve local ambiguities. In 
contrast to previous models, the highest resolution image Introduction to Artificial Intelligence         Final Thesis of 2022 Autumn Semester        Intelligent archaeological overview project
3output is produced.
After the appearance of a GPU implementation of 
CNNs in 2005, which marked a more efficient way to 
implement CNNs, CNNs stood out for their high accuracy 
in the ImageNet competition in 2012, and deep learning 
was officially brought into the limelight. 
Next we will describe several well-known CNN 
models.
3.2 AlexNet
AlexNet was designed by Hinton and his student Alex 
Krizhevsky (2012), and the model won the ImageNet 
competition in 2012. This model is the basis for many 
better and deeper neural networks.
Figure 3.1 Structure of AlexNet
AlexNet contains several relatively new technical 
points: 
--Successfully using ReLU as the activation function 
of CNN and verifying its effectiveness over Sigmoid in 
deeper networks, successfully solving the gradient 
dispersion problem of Sigmoid when the network is 
deeper.
--Dropout was used to randomly ignore some neurons 
during training to avoid overfitting the model.
--Maximum pooling using overlap in CNNs.
--A LRN layer is proposed to create a competition 
mechanism for the activity of local neurons, making the 
values in which the response is relatively large and 
suppressing other neurons with smaller feedback, 
enhancing the generalisation ability of the model.
--Using CUDA to accelerate the training of deep 
convolutional networks, the powerful parallel computing 
capability of the GPU is utilised to handle the large number 
of matrix operations during neural network training.Figure 3.2 Multi-gpu parallel training of AlexNet
--The data enhancement, randomly intercepting a 
224*224 sized region (and horizontally flipped mirror) 
from the original 256*256 image, corresponds to an 
increase of 2*(256-224)^2=2048 times the amount of data. 
Also, the AlexNet paper mentions that it will do PCA 
(Principal Component Analysis) process on the RGB data 
of the image and do a Gaussian perturbation of the 
principal component with a standard deviation of 0.1 to add 
some noise, and this Trick can bring the error rate down by 
another 1%.
3.3 VGGNet
VGGNet was developed in 2014 by researchers from 
the University of Oxford's Computer Vision Group and 
Google DeepMind, and achieved second place in the 
classification event and first place in the localization event 
of the ILSVRC 2014 competition. VGGNet can be seen as 
a deepened version of AlexNet, but in a simpler form.
3.3.1 Structure
VGG consists of 5 convolutional layers, 3 fully-
connected layers, and 1 softmax output layer. The layers 
are separated from each other using a maxpool 
(maximisation pool), and the activation units of all hidden 
layers use the ReLU function. In the original paper, the 
authors designed six network structures, A, A-LRN, B, C, 
D and E, depending on the number of different sub-layers 
of the convolutional layers.
Figure 3.3 Structure of VGGNet
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence         Final Thesis of 2022 Autumn Semester        Intelligent archaeological overview project
4The six networks are similar in structure, all 
consisting of five convolutional layers and three fully 
connected layers, the difference being that each 
convolutional layer has a different number of sub-layers, 
increasing from A to E. The total network depth ranges 
from 11 to 19 layers. The convolutional layer parameters 
in the table are expressed as "conv (receptive field size) - 
number of channels", e.g. con3-64 means a 3x3 
convolutional kernel with 64 channels; maximum pooling 
is expressed as maxpool, with layers separated by 
maxpool; fully connected layers are expressed as "FC - 
number of neurons", e.g. FC-4096 indicates a fully 
connected layer containing 4096 neurons; and finally a 
softmax layer.
In the form, D denotes the well-known VGG16 and E 
denotes the well-known VGG19. For example, the 
structure of VGG16 is shown in the following figure:
Figure 3.4 structure of VGG16
3.3.2 Model advantages
Compared to previous CNN models, VGGNet has the 
following advantages.
--Simple structure: Although VGGNet has more 
layers, its overall structure is not complex. As mentioned 
above, VGG consists of five convolutional layers (each 
with a different number of sub-layers), three fully-
connected layers, a SoftMax output layer, and a 
maxpooling (maximization pool) separating the layers 
from each other, and a ReLU function for the activation 
units of all the hidden layers.
--Small convolutional kernels: Instead of using the 
larger convolutional kernel size in AlexNet (e.g. 7x7), 
VGG achieves the same performance by reducing the size 
of the convolutional kernels (3x3) and increasing the 
number of convolutional sub-layers (VGG: from 1 to 4 
convolutional sub-layers, AlexNet: 1 sub-layer)
--Smaller pooling kernels: compared to AlexNet's 3x3 
pooling kernels, VGG uses all 2x2 pooling kernels.
--More channels, wider features: each channel 
represents a Feature Map, more channels means richer 
image features. 64 channels in the first layer of the VGG network, doubled in each subsequent layer up to 512 
channels, the increased number of channels allows more 
information to be extracted.
--Deeper layers: By using successive small 3x3 
convolutional kernels instead of large ones, the network is 
deeper and fills in the edges, the convolution process does 
not reduce the image size. Also, only small 2x2 pooling 
units are used, reducing the size of the image.
--Fully connected layer to convolutional layer: this is 
a tested method proposed by the authors that enables the 
network model to accept image sizes of arbitrary size.
--Parameter stability: The depth of the six network 
structures, A, A-LRN, B, C, D and E, has increased from 
11 to 19 layers, but the number of parameters has not 
changed much, due to the fact that basically small 
convolutional kernels are used and the parameters are 
mainly concentrated in the fully connected layer.
3.4 ResNet
ResNet was designed by Microsoft Research in 2015 
and won the 1st places on the tasks of ImageNet detection, 
ImageNet localization, COCO detection, and COCO 
segmentation in ILSVRC & COCO 2015 competitions.
Empirically, the depth of the network is critical to the 
performance of the model, and when the number of layers 
is increased, the network can perform more complex 
feature pattern extraction, so theoretically better results can 
be achieved when the model is deeper. However, the 
experiments revealed a Degradation problem in the deep 
network: when the depth of the network increases, the 
accuracy of the network saturates and even decreases. 
ResNet solves the Degradation problem by learning the 
residuals for a stacked layer structure (several layers are 
stacked together) when the input is x. The learned features 
are denoted as H(x), now We want it to learn the residual 
F(x) = H(x) - x, so that the original learned feature is 
actually F(x) + x. This is because residual learning is easier 
than direct learning of the original features. When the 
residuals are 0, the stacking layer is only doing constant 
mapping at this point, at least the network performance 
does not degrade, and in fact the residuals will not be 0. 
This will also allow the stacking layer to learn new features 
on top of the input features and thus have better 
performance. The structure of residual learning is shown in 
Figure 3.5. This is somewhat similar to a "short circuit" in 
a circuit, so it is a shortcut connection. 
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence         Final Thesis of 2022 Autumn Semester        Intelligent archaeological overview project
5Figure 3.5 Residual learning: a building block
The ResNet network is a reference to the VGG19 
network, modified from it and incorporating a residual unit 
through a short-circuiting mechanism, as shown in Figure 
3.6. 
An important design principle of ResNet is that the 
number of feature maps is doubled when the feature map 
size is halved, which maintains the complexity of the 
network layers. As can be seen in Figure 3.6, ResNet adds 
a short-circuiting mechanism between every two layers 
compared to a normal network, which creates residual 
learning, where the dashed line indicates that the number 
of FEATURE MAPs has changed. The 34-layer ResNet, 
shown in Figure 3.6, also allows for the construction of 
deeper networks as shown in Table 3.1. As can be seen 
from the table, for the 18-layer and 34-layer ResNet, it 
performs residual learning between two layers, and when 
the network is deeper, it performs residual learning 
between three layers, with three convolutional kernels of 
1x1, 3x3 and 1x1, respectively. The number of feature 
maps in the implicit layer is relatively small and is 1/4 of 
the number of output feature maps.
Figure 3.6 Example network architectures for 
ImageNet.
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence         Final Thesis of 2022 Autumn Semester        Intelligent archaeological overview project
6Table 3.1. Architectures for ImageNet.
ResNet uses two types of residual units, as shown in 
Figure 3.7. The left figure corresponds to a shallow 
network, while the right figure corresponds to a deep 
network. For short-circuit connections, when the input and 
output dimensions are the same, the input can be added 
directly to the output. But when the dimensions do not 
coincide (corresponding to a doubling of the dimensions), 
this cannot be added directly. There are two strategies: (1) 
using zero-padding to increase the dimensionality, which 
generally requires a downs amp first, and can be done by 
pooling with stride=2, which does not increase the 
parameters; (2) using a new mapping (projection shortcut), 
which generally uses a 1x1 convolution, which increases 
the parameters and also increases the computational 
volume. Short-circuit connections can, of course, use 
projection shortcut in addition to the direct use of constant 
mapping.
Figure 3.7 Example network architectures for 
ImageNet.
4. Feasibility analysis of convolutional neural 
networks applied to ceramic classification
As artificial intelligence continues to develop, 
advances in convolutional neural networks make it 
possible to use them on an increasingly broad level. In the 
archaeological direction, the large sample size and high 
level of knowledge required for feature recognition make 
such specialists in short supply, which makes the use of 
convolutional neural networks a strong necessity. 
Currently, there are already experts in different 
archaeological fields who have used the current popular network models for their applications and obtained good 
results.
4.1. Accuracy and confidence analysis of simple 
models that have already been applied
Bogacz and Mara (2020) used the ResNet50 network 
model in CNN when classifying cuneiform texts from 
different periods. A 3d model was first modelled for the 
different periods of cuneiform writing, a point cloud was 
formed and then machine learning was used and compared 
to accurate classification and an accuracy of 84% was 
obtained. Although the sample set for machine learning is 
not very large and the CNN is not very sensitive to 
macroscopic shapes, especially sharp corner turns, which 
can make the point cloud distribution not very accurate, a 
high accuracy rate was still achieved.This attempt also has 
significant implications for ceramic archaeology, 
particularly in terms of the macroscopic approach to 
classification, and the same applies to the carved patterns 
and painted surfaces of ceramics.
Figure 4.1 Example of cuneiform writing
In addition to this, there are many applications on a 
larger macro level, such as geographic surveys, for 
example, the location of graves and the determination of 
site zones.  
Pawlowicz and Downum (2021) uses image 
recognition technology, developed using CNN, to identify 
the shape of various ceramic surface patterns. The 
researchers classified Tusayan white pottery from 
northeastern Arizona, which has a distinctive black and 
white patterned surface, and with the recognition system 
in operation, obtained an accuracy rate that was 
essentially the same as, and in some cases better than, that 
of an expert human discriminator.
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence         Final Thesis of 2022 Autumn Semester        Intelligent archaeological overview project
7Figure 4.2 Tusayan white ceramic
The purpose of the project is essentially the same as 
the one above, the ARCADIA Project (Chetouani et al. 
2018; Chetouani et al. 2020). Designed to enhance the 
archaeological heritage of the ceramic sherds extracted in 
Saran (France). These sherds date back to the heyday of 
the Middle Ages. They propose to use a convolutional 
neural network (CNN) model to automatically classify 
these ceramic shards. The ultimate goal is to form clusters 
of shards that result in a map representing the movement 
of potters. In order to reduce the workload caused by 
modelling, the surface texture of the ceramics is printed 
directly on white paper by means of ink stamping, and 
then scanned to extract the corresponding texture. As this 
method is not directly applied to relic antique ceramics, 
damage to the ceramic surface does not need to be 
considered.
Figure 4.3 Image processing steps
For the subsequent classification of simple ceramic 
texture shapes, a variety of current CNN network models 
were used for the experiments (ResNet18, VGG11, Alex 
Net) and the best performing network model was then 
selected and evaluated under different configurations. The 
results obtained show the relevance of the method and the 
best results are obtained with the ResNet18+SVM 
configuration.
The project above does not involve a specific project 
application. Pawlowicz and Downum used deep learning 
to quickly sort sherds according to texture in order to better 
classify Tusayan white porcelain.Figure 4.4 Texture classification of Tusayan white 
ceramics
In their study, Pawlowicz and Downum showed that, 
if trained properly, deep learning models can assign types 
to digital images of decorated cattle with an accuracy 
comparable to, and sometimes higher than, that of four 
expert contemporary archaeologists. Pawlowicz trained the 
AI model used for the study in just a few hours on his PC, 
which was equipped with an NVIDIA GPU running a pair 
of common convolutional neural network models, VGG16 
and ResNet50. Far from competing with existing 
archaeologists, the model could even be a valuable tool for 
training new archaeologists.
Results from existing applications show that CNN 
holds great promise in terms of its ability to extract 
recognizable surface features, and that accuracy rates can 
be high.
4.2. Feasibility analysis of ceramic micro 
composition analysis and classification using CNN 
techniques
In the previous section of the technical background 
examination, most of the techniques used the simplest 
CNN models to classify the macroscopic structure of 
ceramics, and the application of CNN is not very mature 
for the direction of component analysis of microscopic 
slices. However, scientists have been using artificial 
neuronal network (ANN) techniques to classify ceramic 
flakes as early as ten years ago.
Aprile, Castellano, and Eramo (2014) constructed 
three network structures to separately identify the three 
different phases in the rock thin section. They approach 
combines image analysis techniques with artificial neural 
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence         Final Thesis of 2022 Autumn Semester        Intelligent archaeological overview project
8networks to automatically classify mineral inclusions and 
pores in archaeological pottery sherds using optical digital 
images. In particular, the automatic identification of quartz, 
calcareous aggregates and secondary porosity was 
considered. A collection of planar and cross-polarized light 
images obtained by means of a digital camera connected to 
an optical microscope in transmitted light was used. 
It is shown that reliable features obtained by 
considering the optical properties of the class of interest 
and the specific neural network structure can provide good 
automatic classification.
Figure 4.5 Flow chart for classifying ceramic slices 
using ANN
The insights from the above studies have led to the 
application of CNNs in the field of slice structure 
classification as well. Lyons, M. (2021) have built a deep 
learning model to automatically identify and classify 
ceramic fabrics, speeding up the classification process and 
reducing the need for experts. Thin-section images of rocks 
in cross-polarized light from the Coconut Tree period 
(1000-1525 AD) archaeological site in Guadalupe, on the 
northeast coast of Honduras, were classified using two 
divisions trained by VGG19 and ResNet50. Although the 
sample size and learning set are not large, the result of 93+% 
classification accuracy in four tests demonstrates an 
efficient classification method, and although this use case 
is narrowly defined, it serves as a proof of concept that 
suggests the method should be broadly applicable to any 
ceramic assemblage of definable ceramic fabrics.
Figure 4.6 Examples of the five ceramic fabric types 
analyzed.  The unique sensitivity of convolutional neural networks 
to texture discrimination makes them an excellent 
predisposition for the analysis of ceramic flake 
compositions. Previous research has applied different 
network models not only for microscopic classification, 
but also for macroscopic characterization of ceramic 
fragments, all with high accuracy, in a way that reduces 
misclassification due to subjectivity, while allowing for 
simultaneous multi-threading to improve efficiency and 
solve the problem of insufficient scholarly reserves. In 
summary, CNNs have a strong need and a promising 
future in the direction of ceramic classification. 
4.3.  Limitations and defects
For many archaeological applications, where ML is 
an aid to more detailed work, such analyses may be 
sufficient. However, they may not be as reliable as 
traditional expert methods because they cannot yet handle 
the range of variability and inconsistency in archaeological 
data.
Often the biggest obstacle to constructing good ML 
models is that they work best when they are built on large 
databases of information, such as thousands of catalogued 
images or material from reliable sources, which can be 
difficult to achieve, particularly in terms of archaeological 
budgets and the diversity of data that may be available. 
Poor preservation of archaeological recovery samples 
makes the task more difficult as fragmentation and surface 
condition (including, for example, erosion, patina and 
vegetation cover) can affect the success of identification. 
Experts can often identify material that is difficult for ML 
models trained on ideal collections to handle.
Another aspect of ML is that models are very much a 
product of the data on which they are constructed. As such, 
these models tend to be classified according to the 
categories they know, which makes them (at least) 
susceptible to two main forms of bias.
The first involves focusing a combination into one of 
the previously identified categories. This means that rare 
and unusual objects can easily be categorized as more 
common types and ignored. For example, a ceramic vessel 
similar in shape to one of the models may look 'normal', 
but may have an unusual surface treatment that an 
archaeologist would immediately notice.
The second form of bias, and perhaps the most 
common, is that the model does not fully incorporate the 
variability of the features being categorized; ML analysis 
can easily lose the 'forest for the trees' because the data 
used to train the model is often stripped of contextual 
information (especially in the case of images) or 
manipulated on a limited number of pre-selected variables, 
which may not include sufficient variables to allow for the 
classification of the model. These variables may not 
include enough information to distinguish important (i.e. 
archaeologically relevant) categories.
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence         Final Thesis of 2022 Autumn Semester        Intelligent archaeological overview project
9ML techniques do have methods for checking 
'performance', but these methods still rely on internal 
mathematical metrics and require the attention of 
archaeological research to ensure that they provide good 
results. Outside of archaeology, difficulties with ML have 
been repeatedly encountered, including exacerbating racial 
and gender bias in commercial settings (Gebru 2020).
5. Conclusion
From the above summarized study, we found that 
CNNs strongly tend to recognize texture rather than shape, 
and that ceramic fabrics are highly textural in nature. This 
is precisely the reason why CNN models can fit with the 
topic of classifying the structure of ancient ceramics. In 
addition, several studies have shown that CNNs are highly 
accurate in classifying ceramic structures, a conclusion that 
provides a piece of mind for researchers in the industry 
who have questioned the rigour of CNN technology.
As deep learning techniques continue to evolve, the 
accuracy and efficiency of neural network models are 
being optimized and improved. Computer-related 
practitioners are happy to see this happen, and there is a 
growing willingness in other industries like archaeology to 
use such techniques to aid their scientific work. We are 
seeing newer and more optimized convolutional neural 
network models being used in many of the latest 
archaeological research projects. The use of computers and 
big data is clearly more efficient than traditional manual 
excavation and identification. We expect archaeological 
research to make even greater breakthroughs with the help 
of technology. 
References:
[1] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., & Sun, J. (2016). Deep 
residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of 
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern 
recognition (pp. 770-778).
[2] Simonyan, K., & Zisserman, A. (2014). Very deep 
convolutional networks for large-scale image 
recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556.
[3]http://ufldl.stanford.edu/tutorial/supervised/Convolutio
nalNeuralNetwork/
[4] Bogacz, B and Mara, H. 2020. Period Classification of 
3D Cuneiform Tablets with Geometric Neural Networks. 
In: 17th International Conference on Frontiers in 
Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR), 2020. IEEE, pp.246–
251.
[5] Caron, M, Bojanowski, P, Joulin, A and Douze, M. 
2018. Deep Clustering for Unsupervised Learning of 
Visual Features. In: Ferrari, V, Hebert, M, Sminchisescu, C and Weiss, Y (eds.). Computer Vision – ECCV 2018. 
Cham: Springer, pp. 139–156. 
[6] Caspari, G and Crespo, P. 2019. Convolutional Neural 
Networks for Archaeological Site Detection – Finding 
“Princely” Tombs. Journal of Archaeological Science, 110: 
104998. 
[7] Cau, M-A, Day, PM, Baxter, MJ, Papageorgiou, I, 
Iliopoulos, I and Montana, G. 2004. Exploring automatic 
grouping procedures in ceramic petrology. Journal of 
Archaeological Science, 31(9): 1325–1338. 
[8] Cheng, G and Guo, W. 2017. Rock images 
classification by using deep convolution neural network. 
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 887: 012089.
[9] Chetouani, A, Debroutelle, T, Treuillet, S, Exbrayat, M 
andJesset, S. 2018. Classification of Ceramic Shards Based 
on Convolutional Neural Network. In: 2018 25th IEEE 
International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP). 
IEEE, pp. 1038–1042. 
[10] LeCun, Y, Boser, B, Denker, JS, Henderson, D, 
Howard, RE, Hubbard, W and Jackel, LD. 1989. 
Backpropagation Applied to Handwritten Zip Code 
Recognition. Neural Computation, 1(4): 541–551. 
[11] LeCun, Y, Bengio, Y and Hinton, G. 2015. Deep 
learning. Nature, 521(7553): 436–444. 
[12] Pawlowicz, LM and Downum, CE. 2021. 
Applications of Deep Learning to Decorated Ceramic 
Typology and Classification: A Case Study using Tusayan 
White Ware from Northeast Arizona. Journal of 
Archaeological Science, 130: 105375. 
[13] Pires de Lima, R, Bonar, A, Coronado, DD, Marfurt, 
K andNicholson, C. 2019a. Deep convolutional neural 
networks as a geological image classification tool. The 
Sedimentary Record, 17(2): 4–9. 
[14] Whitbread, I. 1989. A proposal for the systematic 
description of thin sections towards the study of ancient 
ceramic technology. In: Maniatis, Y (ed.). Archaeometry, 
Proceedings of the 25thInternational Symposium. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 127–138.
[15] Wright, H and Gattiglia, G. 2018. ArchAIDE: 
Archaeological Automatic Interpretation and 
Documentation of cEramics. In: Workshop on Cultural 
Informatics co-located with the EUROMED International 
Conference on Digital Heritage 2018 (EUROMED 2018). 
Nicosia, Cyprus: Zenodo. 
[16] Yosinski, J, Clune, J, Bengio, Y and Lipson, H. 2014. 
How Transferable Are Features in Deep Neural Networks? 
In: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on 
Neural Information Processing Systems – Volume 2. 
NIPS’14. Montreal, Canada: MIT Press, pp. 3320–3328.