LIN YUHANG, PENG SHUBO, DECEMBER 2022 1
Survey of Intelligent Archaeology
Lin Yuhang, Peng Shubo
Abstract —Recently more and more AI techniques are used
in archaeology area, one of which is machine learning (ML).
Application of ML can be divided into two main categories: object
classification and site searching. Classification can not only be
used to classify fragments, like pottery or papyrus, but also help
to merge messy fragments into complete patterns. Site searching
is a new topic raise recently thanks to the popularity of satellites,
whose generated systematized data offers premises for ML. But
ML still has some shortage, most of which limited by nature of
archaeology. In future, ML maybe more used in identification of
archaeological sites, or illegal treatment about art products.
Index Terms —Archaeology, machine learning, classification,
site searching.
I. I NTRODUCTION
ARTIFICIAL Intelligence (AI for short) is a new study
area rising in recent centuries, and can be divided into
several directions, like Machine Learning (ML) or Neural
Network (NN). Five to ten years ago, they were concepts
unknown to archaeologists. But now, AI is widely used,
there are even sessions dedicated to AI at archaeological
conferences.[10]
ML is programming allowing algorithm learning from data
and adjust its parameters and then make predictions on new
data. Objects must be quantify into digital data first and can be
any type, like sonar data under water[9] or aerial laser scanning
data [11]. ML uses mathematical techniques to analyze a set
of already-classified objects and generate ”classifiers” for each
category. In theory, objects in every category is identified from
other categories in mathematics. In short, ML use math to
classify quantifiable objects into different groups.[5]
Ml application can be divided into two main types: classify
archaeological objects, and identify archaeological sites, both
of which will be explained more detailed in II.
Deep learning(DL) a branch of ML, the biggest difference
is that, ML needs human to appoint characteristics of object to
be trained, while DL do not need pre-appointed characteristics.
What DL processing is a large number of data, and DL can
learn and choose significant characteristics by itself. DL will
first determine which characteristics are related to its goal,
then attempt to obtain accessible features on layer level, finally
determine which accessible features match its goal best.
II. A PPLICATION
DL has been successfully used in many applications. Among
the DL methods, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are good at
dealing with sequential data as they take into account temporal
information. RNNs have been applied in speech recognition to
map acoustic sequences to phonetic sequences. RNNs have
also been used in natural language processing to translate
text from one language to another. Another famous methodin DL is convolutional neural networks (CNNs). CNNs take
into account spatial correlation among data points and hence
perform well in image-based data. CNNs have been used in
image classification, face recognition, scene labelling, and so
on. DL methods are also used in the field of remote sensing.
For example, Hu and Yuan used CNNs to extract digital terrain
models (DTMs) and filter out non-ground points from airborne
laser scanning (ALS) data, which was claimed that this method
performs better than previous filtering methods[12].
In the papers we’ve read, we’ve found that all of them,
without exception, use CNNs to study a specific thing. This is
because the things they studied were all based on image data,
in which CNNs performs better than RNNs.
We divide the papers that use CNNs into two types: one is
to classify archaeological objects like papyrus, potteries, and
so on, the other is to detect objects in archaeological sites.
A. classify archaeological objects
•In the paper[1], a method is proposed for matching and
assembling pairs of ancient papyrus fragments containing
mostly unknown scriptures. This task, which is assem-
bling fragments in a puzzle-like manner into a composite
picture, plays an important role in the archaeology, be-
cause it can help historic artifacts to reconstruct archae-
ological objects for research. The proposed method is to
use image processing and machine learning techniques
to identify matching fragments, and then support the
quick and automated classification of matching pairs of
papyrus fragments as well as the geometric alignment of
the pairs against each other. The algorithm was trained
on a batch of fragments which was excavated from the
Dead Sea caves and is dated circa the 1st century BCE.
The algorithm shows excellent results on a validation
set which is of a similar origin and conditions. Then
the algorithm was used to against a real-life set of
fragments for with no prior knowledge or labeling of
matches. This test batch is considered extremely chal-
lenging due to its poor condition and the small size
of its fragments. Evidently, numerous researchers have
tried seeking matches within this batch with very little
success. The algorithm performance on this batch was
sub-optimal, returning a relatively large ratio of false
positives. However, the results showed that this algorithm
eliminated 98% of the possible matches thus reducing
the amount of work needed for manual inspection, which
means this algorithm was quite useful. Indeed, experts
that reviewed the results have identified some positive
matches as potentially true and referred them for further
investigation. A glimpse of this project is shown in Figure
1.LIN YUHANG, PENG SHUBO, DECEMBER 2022 2
Fig. 1: An example of two adjacent artificially torn fragments
with a set of candidate squares to be used in the matching
phase.
•In the paper[13], the project developed at Dumbarton
Oaks—a research institute and library, museum, and
historic garden affiliated with Harvard University and
located in Washington, DC— focused on a collection
of 10,000 images of Syrian monuments in the institu-
tion’s Image Collections and Fieldwork Archives (ICFA).
Drawing on that project, as well as the broader landscape
of AI-based categorisation efforts in the fields of art
and architecture, authors’ insights on the potential of
AI to facilitate and enhance archival image access and
recording will be shaerd. Many of the Syrian sites in
the Dumbarton Oaks collection have been inaccessible
to researchers and the public for over a decade and/or
have been damaged or destroyed. For Dumbarton Oaks,
the primary goal was to explore whether AI can improve
the speed and efficiency of sharing collections and allow
for more sophisticated curation by subject experts who,
thanks to automation, would be relieved of the burden
of rote processing. The methods and techniques explored
included multi-label classification, multi-task classifica-
tion, unsupervised image clustering, and explainability.
A glimpse of this project is shown in Figure 2.
•The main contribution in this paper[10] is the completion
of the project called ArchAIDE. This project realised an
AI-based application to recognise archaeological pottery.
Pottery is of paramount importance for understanding ar-
chaeological contexts. However, recognition of ceramics
is still a manual, time-consuming activity , reliant on
analogue catalogues. The project developed two comple-
mentary machine-learning tools to propose identifications
based on images captured on-site, for optimising and
economising this process, while retaining key decision
points necessary to create trusted results. One method
relies on the shape of a potsherd; the other is based on
decorative features. For the shape-based recognition, a
novel deep-learning architecture was employed, integrat-
ing shape information from points along the inner and
outer profile of a sherd. The decoration classifier is based
Fig. 2: Explainability heatmaps for predictions of the classes
“architecture” (left) and “fac ¸ades” (right) by the Phase 1
classifier.
on relatively standard architectures used in image recog-
nition. In both cases, training the algorithms meant facing
challenges related to real-world archaeological data: the
scarcity of labelled data; extreme imbalance between
instances of different categories; and the need to take note
of minute differentiating features. Finally , the creation of
a desktop and mobile application that integrates the AI
classifiers provides an easy-to-use interface for pottery
classification and storing pottery data.
A glimpse of this project is shown in Figure 3.
In particular, since this project ArchAIDE is the most
classic and mature one among all paper, the more detailed
and overall explanation will be given in III.
Fig. 3: The ArchAIDE portal is available at the Archaeology
Data Service of the University of York.
•The paper[15] indicate that deep learning with CNNs is
a highly accessible and effective method for classifying
ceramic fabrics based on images of petrographic thin
sections and that it can likely be applied on a larger scale.
Classification of ceramic fabrics has long held a majorLIN YUHANG, PENG SHUBO, DECEMBER 2022 3
role in archaeological pursuits. It helps answer research
questions related to ceramic technology, provenance, and
exchange and provides an overall deeper understanding
of the ceramic material at hand. One of the most effective
means of classification is through petrographic thin sec-
tion analysis. However, ceramic petrography is a difficult
and often tedious task that requires direct observation and
sorting by domain experts. In this paper, a deep learning
model is built to automatically recognize and classify
ceramic fabrics, which expedites the process of classi-
fication and lessens the requirements on experts. The
samples consist of images of petrographic thin sections
under cross-polarized light originating from the Cocal-
period (AD 1000-1525) archaeological site of Guadalupe
on the northeast coast of Honduras. Two CNNs, VGG19
and ResNet50, are compared against each other using
two approaches to partitioning training, validation, and
testing data. The technique employs a standard transfer
learning process whereby the bottom layers of the CNNs
are pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset and frozen, while
a single pooling layer and three dense layers are added
to ’tune’ the model to the thin section dataset. After
selecting fabric groups with at least three example sherds
each, the technique can classify thin section images into
one of five fabric groups with over 93% accuracy in each
of four tests. A glimpse of this project is shown in Figure
4.
Fig. 4: Examples of the five ceramic fabric types analyzed.
•In the study[17], an alternate approach to archaeological
typology which uses DL to classify digital images of
decorated pottery sherds into an existing typological
framework is presented. This study focuses on a spe-
cific kind of ancient painted pottery from the American
Southwest, Tusayan White Ware (TWW), but it is be-
lieved that it has broader implications for a wide range
of geographical settings and artifact types. The results
show that when properly trained, a deep learning model
can assign types to digital images of decorated sherds
with an accuracy comparable to, and sometimes higher
than, four expert-level contemporary archaeologists. The
technique also offers novel tools for visualizing both
the importance of diagnostic design elements and overalldesign relationships between groups of pottery sherds.
This method can objectively match a specific unclassified
sherd image to its most similar counterparts through a
search of thousands of digital photos. This discovery has
important archaeological implications for analyzing time
relationships, monitoring stylistic trends, reconstructing
fragmentary artifacts, identifying ancient artisans, and
studying the evolution and spread of ancient technologies
and styles. It also shows how deep learning models can
potentially supplement or supplant traditional typologies
in favor of more direct groupings and comparisons of
artifacts. A glimpse of this project is shown in Figure 5.
Fig. 5: Grad-CAM heat maps for TWW sherds, showing
areas of high (red) and low (blue) model activation for a
Kayenta sherd (top) and Flagstaff sherd (bottom). CNN-
model-calculated type confidences shown below each sherd.
B. detect objects in archaeological sites
Airborne laser scanning (ALS) is of great use in collecting
and documenting detailed measurements from an area of inter-
est. However, it is time consuming for scientists to manually
analyze the collected ALS data. One possible way to automate
this process is using deep neural networks.
In the paper[14], a hierarchical CNN model is builded to
detect objects in archaeological sites using digital terrain mod-
els (DTMs) generated from ALS data. The data is acquired
from the Harz mining Region in Lower Saxony, where a high
density of different archaeological monuments including the
UNESCO world heritage site Historic Town of Goslar, Mines
of Rammelsberg, and the Upper Harz Water Management
System can be found. Objects to be detected are archaeological
objects such as hollow ways, streams, pathways, lakes, streets,
ditches, heaps, mining shafts, and more, but for this study, the
model is fit to detect 4 classes of objects: natural streams,
lakes, tracks, and an ’others’ class which represents the rest
of the objects for which enough labeled data is not available
yet. To compare and validate the method in this paper, someLIN YUHANG, PENG SHUBO, DECEMBER 2022 4
experiments on the same data set using two existing deep
learning models were conducted. The first model is VGG-
16; an image classification network pretrained on ImageNet
data. The second model is a stacked autoencoders model. The
results of the classification as analyzed in this paper show that
our model is suitably tuned for this task as it achieves the best
classification accuracy of around 91 percent, compared to 88
percent and 82 percent accuracy by the pretrained and stacked
autoencoders models, respectively. A glimpse of this project
is shown in Figure 6 and 7.
Fig. 6: Heat maps using filter size 48 x 48. Colors show the
confidence of the models in detecting objects at that location.
Fig. 7: Heat maps using filter size 98 x 98. Colors show the
confidence of the models in detecting objects at that location.
C. More
We believe that there are many other studies using RNNs
to study the meaning of certain patterns on ancient artifacts or
to try to decipher ancient texts. But this is out of the scope of
our survey.III. A RCHAIDE P ROJECT
To make things clear, a classic and mature classification
project is briefly shown in this part. The reason why classifi-
cation is chosen rather than searching sites is that, the number
of paper about classification is much more than searching area.
Among all applications in paper, the most classic and the most
mature one is picked out here.
The name of project introduced here is “ArchAIDE”. The
most remarkable characteristic of this project is that, it not
only invent algorithm and do analysis on data from both view
of shape and decorations, but also realize a system that could
have a realworld implementation.
A. General Introduction
ArchAIDE project aims at optimizing the ceramic identifica-
tion process. It developed two different deep neural networks
to recognize pottery through images using a mobile device.The
first network is specially used for image recognition, also
called appearance-based recognition. The second network uses
the shape of fragmentation to identify.
Unlike familiar worries about AI, ArchAIDE will not re-
place the knowledge of domain specialists. On the contrary,
it put archaeologists’ role in the center of decision-making
process in the identification workflow, which can be seen in
III-C.
B. Materials
A correct result of classification relies on two parts: the
label or the name of each category, and the available data for
both shape-based and appearance-based recognition. But first,
the class of relics should be determined.
1) Classes for training:
Among all categories of cultural relics, the project choose
four realworld classes for training:
•Amphorae manufactured throughout the Roman world
between the late 3rd century BCE and the early 7th
century CE. (Figure 8a)
•Roman Terra Sigillata manufactured in Italy , Spain, and
South Gaul between the 1st century BCE and the 3rd
century CE.
•Majolica produced in Montelupo Fiorentino (Italy) be-
tween 14th and 18th century.
•medieval and post-medieval Majolica from Barcelona and
Valencia. (Figure 8b)
(a) Roman amphorae
 (b) Majolica of Montelupo Fiorentino
Fig. 8: Material for trainingLIN YUHANG, PENG SHUBO, DECEMBER 2022 5
2) Label:
To get correct and helpful label of categories, the project
implements following systems:
•A digital comparative collection for pottery types, deco-
rations, and stamps, combining digital collections, digi-
tised paper catalogues, and data acquired through photo
campaigns.
•A semi-automated system for paper catalogues’ digitisa-
tion.
•A multilingual thesaurus of descriptive pottery terms,
mapped to the Getty Art and Architecture Thesaurus,
which includes French, German, Spanish, Catalan, Por-
tuguese, English, and Italian.
The digital collections and paper catalogues to create digital
comparative collections are from already-present databases.
The first one is “Roman Amphorae: a digital resource”[19],
created by Simon Keay and David Williams of the University
of Southampton and published as open data on the Archaeol-
ogy Data Service, that includes the principal types of roman
amphorae between the late 3rd century BCE and the early 7th
century CE. The other one is “CERAMALEX” database[16], a
proprietary database of the German and French Heritage 2021.
Limited by space, detailed principles of them will not be
shown here.
3) Training images:
Multiple photo campaigns were also carried out in several
archaeological warehouses, involving more than 30 different
institutions in Austria, Italy , and Spain. Overall, 3498 sherds
were photographed for training the shape-based recognition
model. For appearance-based recognition, a dataset of 13,676
pictures was collected through multiple photography cam-
paigns.
To offset disadvantages above in some term, each original
image is scaled into four different sizes. On each scaled image,
three versions are created: unflipped, horizontally flipped, and
vertically flipped. All of these images are cropped, leaving just
the central square. As a result, 12 images from each original
one were obtained.
C. Method
The decoration of pottery fragments have higher priority
than shape because decorations is more reliable than the shape
of fragments. When decoration presents, decoration will be
used to identify rather than appearance. Appearance-based
recognition is used only when the pottery is undecorated.
1) Shape-based Recognition:
The recognition tool was designed as a two-phase process,
where the classification algorithm was first developed on one
dataset and then validated on other datasets for different types
of pottery.
The dataset used 65 standardised toplevel classes defined
in Conspectus catalogue[4]. 2D model are created from these
drawings and photos taken in archaeological warehouses
throughout Europe by extracting the profile of the entire vessel
from 2D drawing. Then 2D model rotate around revolution
axis to form 3D models.Then many 3D planes are generated randomly. Computer
will calculated how all the circles intersect the plane, con-
necting the intersection points from the circles along the
profile to generate the fracture face. To create a more realistic
synthetic fracture, we reduced its size to match real potsherds’
dimensions. [7] The progress is shown in Figure 9.
Fig. 9: Stpes from extracting profiles from 2D drawings, to
creation of 3D models to be broken.
The network was trained based on the requirement to divide
the inner and the outer profile of the sherd, the relevance
of the position of the points along the profile outline, the
intrinsic noise in the tracing procedure, and the requirement
to overcome sub-optimal data acquisition processes[2], the
example of which is in Figure 10.
Fig. 10: Extraction of the outer (green) and inner (red) profiles
from image.
To emphasize, the goal is not to increase accuracy of top-
1 but that of top-K, which matches straight-forward sense.
Because This fits with its function as a reference tool for
pottery specialists who would be glad to evaluate a shortlist
of results as part of the obligatory expert validation but would
be disappointed to use a tool where the correct result is often
completely omitted.
2) Appearance-based Recognition: It is find in experience
that the most challenging factor that affected identification was
varying illumination. So different white balance, brightness,
and contrast adjustments are simulated. Each pixel’s brightness
is multiplied by a random factor to simulate different lighting
level.
Moreover, the background and ruler varied significantly,
leading to an inherent bias. The foreground was extracted
automatically from the training images using the GrabCut
algorithm to avoid this conditioning [18].LIN YUHANG, PENG SHUBO, DECEMBER 2022 6
D. App Workflow
ArchAIDE also create a mobile application connected to AI
classifiers to support archaeologists in recognizing potsherds
during excavation and post-excavation analysis, with an easy-
to-use interface.
Archaeologists take a picture of a potsherd and send it to
the specifically trained classifier, which returns five suggested
matches from the comparative collections. Once the correct
type is identified, the information is linked to the photographed
sherd and stored within a database that can be shared online.
As shown in Figure 11.
The mobile application was also designed for allowing the
use in lack of internet connectivity , such as in storehouses or
remote rural areas. Application provides an area called “my
sites”, dedicated to registered users where it is possible to store
information about sites and assemblages. When offline, the
app permits storing new images of potsherds or browsing the
reference database. The app registers the information locally
when offline and then saves the information into the server
online.
Fig. 11: The double workflow for appearance-based and shape-
based recognition from an input image to top 5 results.
IV. S HORTAGE
Despite its help, ML still has some limitations.
The biggest difficulty is the shortage of training data.
Archaeology is widely digitised, but rarely datafied[3]. ML
prefers Big Data which is findable, accessible, interoperable,
and reusable. But nature of archaeology makes it hard to
produce huge data, and much already-had data is unusable
due to copyright or legislation.[10]
ML relies on its previously created model too much, and
requires new data to be applicable to its model. Most ML
models for archaeological data are less reliable than human
experts now, because algorithms can’t consider the variation
and consistencies of data. That is, human experts can quickly
handle easy cases, and move extra time to complicate cases,
but algorithms handle every sample with same process and
consume similar time. This disadvantage may offset ML ad-
vantages of high calculation speed and scalability benefits.[5]
The diversity of archaeological objects makes classification
more hard. The archaeological recovered samples may becomefragmented, or be covered by patina and vegetation. These
poor preservation of samples makes classification hard. More-
over, rare and unusual objects may be ignored by ML models.
A look-like “normal” ceramic vessel may has an unusual
surface treatment, which will be easily noticed by human,
could be classified into normal category by ML models.[5]
A third reason is the accuracy of evaluation function in ML
model. This sort of bias is of particular concern for archae-
ologists using ML on data associated with Indigenous com-
munities. Archaeologists can use surveys based on acultural
factors to create models that are stripped of cultural context
and meaning. But these assumptions are being more and more
challenged, especially when surveys focus on behaviors and
outcomes rooted in cultural value systems.[6][8]
V.FUTURE
Nowadays, archaeologists utilize AI in many ways, from
creating 3D models of historical sights to scanning territories
with a laser radar to find ancient graves or from matching
and assembling pairs of ancient papyrus fragments containing
mostly unknown scripture to detecting objects in archaeolog-
ical sites using DTMs generated from ALS data. There is no
denying that AI becomes more and more popular in the field
of archaeology and plays an important role in it.
One direction for the future development of intelligent
archaeology is helping archaeologists’ work. For example,
archaeologists often face such problems as not knowing where
exactly to dig. They can define the region but not the exact
place where an artifact or a grave lies. It’s when the neural
network comes in line. Instead of looking through millions
of documents by themselves, archaeologists pass this work to
neural networks. This technology can sort out information by
utilizing a specific algorithm. By analyzing images, this system
might not only direct archaeologists in their groundworks but
also suggest territories that have similar patterns as potential
objects for excavations.
However, knowing that many ML systems — especially
deep neural networks — are essentially considered black
boxes. This makes it hard to understand and explain the
results given by a model. Because of this, it should be noted
that AI does not replace the need for experts in archaeology.
Instead, AI technology needs the expertise from archaeologists
to improve itself and to judge the correctness of the results.
Another direction is to strengthen the identification of the
artifacts. In our world, one of the most urgent problems in
archaeology is the fact that many artifacts are traded on the
dark web. Although many models trained in this direction
have achieved quite good results, they are not yet ready to
be applied in practice. Currently, the majority of detection
operations are performed manually. If an AI can succeed in
this direction, it would make an extraordinary contribution to
the prevention of art-related illegal activities.
We expect that in the future, artificial intelligence technol-
ogy will play an increasing, even irreplaceable role in the field
of archaeology.LIN YUHANG, PENG SHUBO, DECEMBER 2022 7
